So it’s been a couple of crazy, jam-packed weeks for me since I finished semester. I’m on holidays from University for a month at the moment. Before I get into the nitty-gritty of this article, here’s a brief rundown of what I’ve been doing with myself (apart from learning Chinese). I’m gonna take the liberty and pretend like you all care, since, like, it’s my blog and I can write whatever I want!

    Working on my own business. Yep. In the coming weeks (hopefully), I’m going to be launching my own project dubbed ‘Write Fluently’, which will be an affordable essay and assignment editing service for international students, run by Australian University students with high levels of written and academic English. Although it is a for-profit endeavour, I’m not a heartless capitalist and so there will also be a program for motivated economically disadvantaged students to get their essays corrected for free. 
    Organising volunteering for AMEP (Adult Migrant English Program). Next semester I’m going to be volunteering with AMEP teaching English to immigrants. I was looking for a way that I could give back to the community (that sounds so cliché) and I think I’ve found it. I’m passionate about learning languages and I really think I could give the students some food for thought about how to take charge of their learning and about my own approach to language learning which is quite different to methods promoted in a traditional classroom environment.
    Opening a Crêperie with a friend. That’s right! I don’t think I mentioned this before, but for a year and a half I worked in a French Crêperie here in Melbourne so that I could hit two birds with one stone – making a bit of cash whilst also maintaining and improving my French (the staff were all French). My boss was an asshole, though, unfortunately, and so I left. Now, though, I’m the head crêpe chef of this new place that will be open soon! Anyway, back to the article.

Simplicity Over Complexity

As a background to this story, my parents are both University professors/lecturers, and both have a large number of international students in their courses (most of whom come from China, actually). It has come to my attention, mostly because of the test-corrections I’ve been doing as part of my preparation to launch my project, Write Fluently, that many English as a second language speakers have a strong tendency to use extremely complex language, when it is both appropriate and inappropriate to do so.

In academic and other University level essay writing, it is more or less expected that people have recourse to a large vocabulary, and there are often a number of field-specific jargon that is used exclusively in particular types of writing. The problem, though, lies in that many students (native speakers included) forget that the main purpose of language is communication, and fall into the false belief that the more complex the words are, the better.

In reality, often using over complicated or ‘sophisticated’ words actually confuse and convolute the meaning the author is trying to communicate, to the point where it is sometimes next to IMPOSSIBLE to understand what is written. This is not an exaggeration. The underlying rule of writing is that if you don’t completely understand the words you’re using or the context in which they are used, then you shouldn’t be using them. Because, chances are, you’ve used them badly or in inappropriate situations, and the assessor will probably have no idea what you are talking about. And if they can’t actually understand what you’re trying to say, then Houston, we have a problem.

Furthermore, it’s definitely worth doing a bit of honest self-reflection to see whether we, English speakers, do the same thing in the languages we’re learning. Personally, I tend to adopt an almost overly informal use of the languages I speak or am learning, as since I am mainly learning for pleasure rather than for business or due to necessity, I try to emulate the speech of the people around me. For example, I spent part of high school in France, and so I speak French like the other high school kids, rather than like my professors.

    “I took introductory French for a semester and the forgetting curve just took its impartial course of justice on me”.

This sentence was written by a Chinese student currently studying in Australia, with whom I’ve been in contact recently and have been having great discussions about China/Australia and language learning. He kindly let me put this phrase he used in my blog, as I think it encapsulates perfectly how most foreigners misuse English. He said that, in China at least, the teaching of English is primarily centred around rote-learning highly technical words such as those in the sentence above, for some reason.

Firstly, if I had to guess what this student was studying, I probably would have guessed psychology (which is correct). I studied psychology in high school and remember words such as ‘the forgetting curve’ very well. The problem is, though, that this student probably doesn’t realise that such expressions have a particular meaning that they aren’t really used in other more general contexts. I think the ‘impartial course of justice’ thing is just an example of a student not really knowing how to use the words in the sentence properly, but trying to anyway. Believe me, I know how they feel. When I first started writing essays when I was a teenager I did the same thing. Eventually, though, you develop a competency of writing that lends itself to the natural use of eloquent language, to some extent – trying to ‘fancy up’ your writing is usually a bad idea.

Furthermore, this phrase, although unnecessarily complex, might almost be appropriate in a psychology report, if relevant, however in this case it was used in an informal email. To me, this is just a bit weird, and is kind akin to speaking in Shakespearian English. Such a level of formality is really not needed in an email. So, guys, if you ain’t Shakespeare, quit speaking like him!

The Solution

Fortunately, unlike many other pitfalls in language learning, such as bad pronunciation, this one is relatively easy to get out of. The solution lies in massive input. For those unfamiliar with this term, massive input refers to doing a huge amount of ‘passive’ language activities, primarily reading and listening. Doing so is effectively like uploading a bunch of words and phrases with their associated contexts into your brain, the big computer, to the extent that they seem to automatically spring to mind when you are in need of them.

I believe that an idea in its early stages, deep inside your mind, exists independently of language. I think that it is then ‘translated’ into the language you’re are using. I think that the brain almost instantly links this idea with suitable words of phrases retrieved from your memory.

If you’ve already incorporated input activities into your daily language learning diet – you’ll know what I mean. When you’ve heard a phrase used correctly thousands of times, hearing it said otherwise will just sound plain weird. I’m sure you’ve all experienced a similar phenomenon in your native language when speaking with a foreigner, where you know that what they said is incorrect, but just can’t explain why. This is because as a child we all receive massive input, as our native languages are continually spoken to and around us from Day 1. Massive input allows us to develop a ‘feel’ for a language that we develop instinctively in our native ones.

You don’t want to focus too much on only using words you’ve heard before, though, because you don’t want to only be able to regurgitate rote-learned material, you want to use the language, right? The best strategy is to let your ‘language intuition’ develop by allowing yourself to ‘feel’ the language, rather than making sure your language use conforms to the grammar points you’ve learnt in class. Therefore, my advice to both people learning English and people learning any other language alike is as follows:

    Don’t make it up. This can be difficult, but try not to just randomly make up sentences on the fly until you reach a relatively advanced level. You are likely to ingrain your mistakes. Try to use phrases you’ve heard before in the dialogues and texts you’re studying. Obviously this is not always possible, so if you aren’t sure, ask the person you’re speaking with!
    Get some input. Go and listen and read until you feel the language sinking into your very psyche. I know I sound like a broken record constantly blabbering about this, but it’s true – the only way to speak in an authentic way in a second language is through constant exposure to it.
    Be simple. Don’t try to impress anyone. Hey, being able to speak another language at all is pretty impressive, anyway. Just focus first on making sure you’re meaning is clear. It’s great to experiment with new words and phrases in normal conversation where making mistakes doesn’t matter – but please, if you’re writing an academic piece, tone it down!
