Okay, so, I realise that a lot of the content on this blog, like the content of other language learning blogs, is crazily nerdy and likely incomprehensible to those not already in ‘the language game’ due to references to things like ‘SRS’, ‘Massive Comprehensible Input’, ‘Silent Period’, ‘Reps’, ‘Learning vs Acquisition’, and the like.

The reality is that a lot of traffic coming to this blog and others are probably the product of a single Google search by a normal person, meaning someone who isn’t as geeky as some of us. I’m also willing to concede that most readers probably have a vague interest at best. Fair enough, too. In any case, let me fill you guys in.

So, you want to learn a language?

I understand that it may seem to newcomers like there is a huge learning curve involved in simply understanding what the hell we’re all on about. Which is ironic, really, as these ‘language’ terms are concepts intended to help people learn languages.

The first thing I’d like to say to people learning a second language for the first time is that you can definitely do it! 

No matter your goal, either complete fluency or a survival level of the target language, you can achieve it. I have distinct memories of myself stressing hard about learning French, and doubting that I would ever be able to speak it fluently. There just seemed to be so much to learn. But trust me, you can do it.

The number one rule is that you need to enjoy yourself. Enjoy the learning process. If you are too worried about the outcome, you will fail. Find some interesting beginner content, and get listening, reading and learning the vocab!

I recommend the ‘Who Is She’ series available at LingQ. It is a short story consisting of about 20 even shorter parts that introduces a lot of necessary beginner vocabulary. What’s better, is that it is available in most languages LingQ offer (a lot), so this is a great starting point for learners of any language. I usually begin learning a language by listening to these.

Rather than focusing on the outcome, of fluency, or whatever: set yourself mini goals. At the beginning, maybe this will be learning the 30 most common words by the end of the week. Learn all of the words in Part 1 of Who Is She, for example.

The best way to start is just by starting. Seems simple, but a lot of people get anxious about feeling lost about where to start and give up before they’ve begun. Get some learning materials, and just get started.

Stay tuned for more beginner tips, I am keen to write a couple more posts on what to do when beginning a language!