No, no you don’t. Embrace your inner hermit.
You antisocial bastard.

The truth is, having Chinese friends, unless you are already quite advanced, is more likely to hinder you than help you. Hear me out.

Chances are, they speak better English (Engrish?) than you, meaning that they will likely quickly get sick of you massacring their language and switch to English. Although from my experience Chinese people are often quite bad at English (Westerners are definitely even worse at Chinese), education is highly valued, like in most other Asian cultures, and so they probably suck less than you suck.

And, believe me, once you get stuck speaking English with them, there ain’t no way out. Because if you always speak in English together, speaking in Chinese would just be plain weird. I know this from experience from when my French friends try to speak English to me so they can ‘practice’. It is weird. Even in Melbourne I have a lot of French friends because I used to work in a French Crêperie, but since my French was better than their English, we just got used to speaking French together. They would all try at times to practice their English on me, but it always felt unnatural.

So you’re better off holding delaying trying to make Chinese friends until you have at the very least a decent level of understanding in Chinese.

Also, it is hard to forge any real friendship with someone if one of you doesn’t speak the language well – you can’t understand half of what they are saying, their jokes, etc. You’ll end up being that creepy foreign dude that keeps bugging them.

Instead, get your input on.

There are a wealth of podcasts, Chinese courses and other materials out there to keep you busy well throughout your awkward beginning phase. See my Resources page. Find something that interests you and listen a lot, and build up a decent vocabulary of at least the most common words and phrases. Honestly, trying talking to Chinese people before at least a year of study is likely a waste of time. Many language gurus think that this will actually be detrimental to your ability to speak the language, in particular your accent.

I don’t necessarily believe this is true, just because in my experience an accent is something that develops over time, at least for me. Pronunciation is something you need to get on top of early on, though. When I first went to France people had trouble understanding me because of my strong accent, but nowadays French people (mostly the deaf or intellectually disabled ones) often mistake me for one of their own, or at least think that I come from a French family. Or, surprisingly, from Quebec.

There is a whole other school of language learners, led by people such as ‘Benny The Irish Polyglot‘ who think that speaking from day one is the best way to learn a language.

I don’t think either approach will necessary cause any lasting damage – I just think that listening and reading is more efficient in the early stages. There are some extreme examples of what’s called the input approach (listening to huge amounts of the language before uttering a word), such as a guy called Keith Lucas who has watched 2350 hours of Chinese television at the time of writing, without taking any Chinese classes. In fact, I believe he didn’t try to speak or actively learn anything until he had watched about 1000 hours. Woah.

You gotta admire the guy’s dedication, but, shit, son – that’s a lot of TV.

I think there are definitely more efficient ways than that. This said, watching TV can be immensely rewarding (that’s how I learnt Spanish!) but I can’t imagine doing what he did.

But I digress.

Chinese friends would be great, but it would be more fun for both parties once you’ve learnt a decent amount.