So today marks both my first post on this blog, and my first lesson with a private Chinese tutor I found on the Internet.

Now, at this stage, according to my University, I am at an intermediate level of Chinese. We’re nearing the end of Semester 1, and this is my second year of my Chinese studies and of my degree (I’m doing a double degree in Law and Arts with a major in Chinese).

Whether or not I’m actually at an ‘intermediate’ level of Chinese sort of comes down to your own definition of what ‘intermediate’ actually is. Despite being in only my third semester, we have covered quite a lot of ground and have covered a lot, if not most, of the basics*. I think I know about 700 汉字 or characters. Granted, my knowledge of many of them is often fleeting – some of them stick in my memory the first time I copy them into my character book, and others, erm… don’t stick at all.

I’ve noticed that after a few cycles of learning, forgetting, and relearning, they do seem to stick a bit better. Especially the ones that pop up often. I suppose this is what the SRS method is based on (I will give you my views on SRSing later – ‘cos I know you are all desperate for my opinion). For example, I can’t imagine myself forgetting characters like 我，你，他，是，or  汉语 – characters that a year ago just looked like a clusterfuck of squiggles on a page, or a doodle done by my girlfriend’s 3 year old cousin.

I realise that these are the most basic of characters, but since now they are stuck in my mind to the point that it would be almost impossible to forget their meaning – does this mean that a year from now, all the characters I’m currently struggling with will seem equally familiar? I hope so. If not, dayum, this might take a while.

This thought/hope gives me the strength to carry on. Every Chinese learner goes through days when they get sick of spending hours laboriously scrawling down badly written characters only to forget them minutes, if not seconds, later. Days when the strange sounds of the spoken language, which seemed to be getting clearer only an hour ago, now sound like Bill Cosby on amphetamines.

Indeed, it’s times like these that you want to throw your Chinese dictionary out the window and pick up an ‘easier’ language. Even I, your humble host, experience moments like that. Then I remember that I use my iPad as a dictionary, and remind myself that that would be a very pricey tantrum.

In all seriousness though, just try to enjoy the process of learning Chinese rather than focussing on the outcome. It’s kind of ironic, because the more you worry about much you suck at Chinese, the more you will suck at Chinese (this applies to any other language). Only once you start having fun with it will you really start to see progress. Possibly because you’re having so much fun you can’t stop learning. And then you don’t even want to get fluent, because then you’d have to find another nerdy hobby!

Personally, though, I would probably evaluate myself as being at the upper-beginner level, at most. This became apparent today in my first lesson with a private tutor – because well, frankly, I sucked pretty hard. The suckage was fairly immense. But it was fun!

The lesson was conducted almost entirely in Chinese, with some English explanations here and there; mostly when I guess I either looked super confused, or when I just failed to respond to what she was saying, and so just gaped at her awkwardly. Shit got even more awkward when she clearly just asked me a question, but I had no clue what she was saying, cos, like, I was still trying to work out the first word she said. And ‘cos I missed the next three things she said. And the three things before it. And because I couldn’t remember how to say:

‘Say what-?!‘
(我不明白！你说什么呢？）

Hopefully in a couple of months I’ll be well and truly at the intermediate stage, though.

再见！