Lacking motivation? Keep putting off that Chinese study? Haven’t learnt a new character since you bought that World of Warcraft expansion pack?

One month challenges are for you.

I first heard about them online a couple of months ago, I think in a psychology journal (I can’t remember which, sorry!). Anyway, I read that habits are formed in around 30 days (less in some people), and that by setting yourself a goal of doing a specific task every day for a month, we are likely to assimilate it into our life as one of our everyday activities.
So, armed with this newfound knowledge, I set out precisely one month ago on my first One Month Challenge: to get 1 hour of Chinese input a day.

Studying seriously becomes so much easier when it becomes a habit. Lemme explain.

What is a habit? And why do we have them?

People like to believe that they have absolute free will over their actions and behaviours. That they are the one master of their destiny. In reality, most of our behaviour is hardwired into our subconscious – we don’t notice, of course, but a lot of what we do is governed, and explicable by reference to these unconscious processes of the brain. An example of this is psychological addictions, such as addiction to drugs such as marijuana that, chemically, have no physically addictive qualities. Specific behaviours develop and strengthen over time. In order to use it to its full potential, we must recognise that the brain is a muscle that must be trained, just like the muscles needed to physically carry out the brain’s messages.

The reason you cannot immediately play a guitar the first time you pick it up is not only because your fingers can’t physically perform the required movements, but also because your brain doesn’t have the capacity to do so yet. Over time, your fingers develop ‘muscle memory’ that allows them to quickly snap from chord to chord. Your brain simultaneously develops the neural connections associated with playing the guitar, without which you would not be able to play.

We can extend this to the question of why people procrastinate. Why do they seem unable to stop themselves? In case you don’t see where I’m going with this, I’ll spell it out for you: they have gotten into the habit of procrastinating and cannot just simply, well, stop. They need to train their subconscious to ignore the temptation, and their conscious mind will follow.

How does this apply to learning Chinese?

We are creatures of habit. If you can commit to doing a bit of Chinese every day for one month (30 days), then this action will become a habit, one that will be much easier to maintain henceforth than if you study only sporadically every few days or weeks.
You won’t even think twice about getting your daily dose of 汉语. It will seem almost automatic, and, in fact, it kind of will be, as this behaviour will be determined by your subconscious as part of your daily ritual rather than as a tedious task you’d rather avoid. Chinese won’t be something you put off. Of course, of equal importance is loving the learning process, but don’t get me started on that –  that’s a post for another time!

Sure, maybe you are busy one day and don’t do your study. Whatever, dude, shit happens. I suggest you make up for it by doing extra the next day, at the very least in the first month. If you regularly skip days, then you are greatly decreasing the effectiveness of the ‘one month challenge’ experiment.

Also, for maximum effectiveness, set yourself a specific daily target. As mentioned, my target was 1 hour of input (reading or listening) per day, every day. I will detail how I went below. Can’t manage an hour? Make it half an hour, or even just 15 minutes; just make sure you do it every day. C’mon, you expect me to believe you don’t have thirty, measly, spare minutes in your day?

You will be surprised at how well you go, and how easy and natural it becomes.
Mark down how much you did for every given day on your phone or on a piece of paper, and maybe a tick if you reached your goal, and a cross if you didn’t.

My One Month Challenge: 1 Hour of Input a Day

I wanted to start with a modest goal for my first challenge. I think this is a good way to go, because you don’t want to be overwhelmed from the get-go and give up after a few days. Do as much, or as little, as you can manage. If reaching your daily goal seems like a chore, consider reducing it.

In fact, there is something to be said for easing gradually into the habit. Maybe start with 20 minutes a day for the first month, then 40 minutes the next, then an hour the one after that. If you are too ambitious, you will likely burn out quickly and lose motivation. It’s easy to get super excited a do 2 hours on the first day and think, “Shit, I’m going so well!”, but keeping it up for the whole month is where the heart of the challenge lies, and, unfortunately, that’s most likely the only way it’s going to work.

So, how did I go, you ask?

Well, as I said, I was aiming for 1 hour a day on average for the entire month, so, 30 hours in total. I took down the amount of time I spent listening using the ’Notes’ app on my phone, but I’m going to also include the time I spent on Anki (I used it nearly every day for the whole month) and Skritter (which I got into for the last week or so).

Here it is.