Cheer up Bernie!

I was listening to the Brian Lehrer show this morning on WNYC. The first segment started with an audio excerpt from the NY Daily News interview with candidate Bernie Sanders. They asked what would happen with Chase or BofA after they were broken up, and Sanders says that would be up to them. 

When I read this quote it sounded awful. Like he hadn't thought about it and was caught by surprise. But I had a wholly different impression when I heard the audio. It sounded correct. If someone is caught breaking the law, convicted, and penalized, it is up to them what they do after that. The government has no say in how you stop breaking the law, just that you do it.

Okay score ten points for Uncle Bernie. He wins. 

So now they introduce the Bernie surrogate, former president and CEO of the NAACP, Ben Jealous. I had seen him argue with Joan Walsh on Chris Hayes' MSNBC show, and was appalled by how negative and arrogant he is. Really hostile. I thought, but he can't be a jerk here, they just tee'd up a fat pitch for him. I imagined that he would say "Brian, you know that is exactly how it actually works in the real world. The government doesn't tell you how to stop breaking the law just that you must do it."

But no, of course that is not what he said. This is what he said.

"Well Brian you know the Daily News has endorsed Senator Clinton."

And that my friends is why Bernie's candidacy is such a downer. Everyone but them is to blame for everything, even when the candidate was right, it's the Daily News fault he was wrong. See the problem! You can't win by always losing. 

And of course the Daily News is corrupt. 

It sometimes seems that to Sanders and his supporters that they are the only honest people, everyone else is corrupt, on the take. Except they lack the guts to come out and say it. They lead you right up to it and stop. So the Daily News endorsed HRC. And... ? And what. This was all an ad for HRC? 

Shaking my head. Yeah life isn't fair, we all know that. But if you look like you're unprepared the way to address that is to exude preparedness, overcompensate, but please don't blame the rest of us. 