Speaking Topics For 2016: Business (R)Evolution, Culture 2.0, Innovation, Experience, Digital, WTF


I°Øve been speaking professionally for just over 10 years and I°Øve learned many things along the way. One lesson though stands at the top, which is no matter how much I think I know, I must always keep learning.  Like everyone and everything, I must compete for relevance now and in the future by re-thinking and re-imagining my purpose and the value I hope offer others. So, once a year, I take time to reflect on what°Øs important and also what°Øs stirring ahead. This time of year is perfect to assess my platform for the year ahead and I wanted to share it with you here.

While I still talk about topics that helped get me to where I am today, I continue to add chapters to the portfolio of expertise. In fact, for those who don°Øt know, I have a new book out and it will be part of my program for years to come. This helps me think through topics that help those who work in event planning for conferences, meetings or festivals, those looking for speakers to engage executives employees or anyone seeking a fresh, human, and rousing voice to push people out of the comfort zones.

If you need a speaker or want to work with me, please contact me here.

Cheers!

Bio

Brian Solis is a leading digital analyst, anthropologist, and futurist. He studies disruptive technology and its impact on business and society. Through his reports, articles and books, he humanizes technology°Øs short and long-term effect to help see people and markets differently and understand what to do about it. Brian°Øs work covers topics including digital transformation, customer experience digital marketing, culture 2.0 and °∞the future of°± industries, trends and behavior. His site, briansolis.com, is recognized as one of the top destinations for business leaders around the world. He actively contributes to AdAge, Wired and Forbes. And, he°Øs followed by over 500,000 people on Linkedin, Twitter and Facebook.

His new book, X: The Experience When Business Meets Design, explores the importance of experiences and how to design them for customers, employees and human beings everywhere. Solis also designed the book to be an experience as a physical example of what°Øs possible when you take a step back to rethink products, services and models in a new economy (and world).

Topics

1) Business (R)evolution

Digital Darwinism: How incumbent companies are making mistakes that are sealing their fates and how to do to survive and thrive in an era of digital Darwinism.

Digital Transformation: The State and future of digital transformation and how it°Øs changing businesses at the very core.

Leadership Comes from The Top and Anywhere: Change agents and business mavericks and how they inspire change and what it takes to identify, empower and lead them.

2) Experience Design

From CX to DCX to X: How the digital customer experience is inspiring change for the entire customer experience.

Introducing Generation-C: Meet Generation C, your connected customer and why Millennials and kids aren°Øt the only customers changing the world.

Experience Design as the New Brand: An experience divide exists between your brand promise and what people experience and share. Learn how to create experiences that engender fans and builds wildly successful relationships throughout the customer lifecycle.

The Four Moments of Truth: How micro-moments are reshaping the new customer journey in each of the four moments of truth.

Mobile is Eating the World: In a world where customers in every industry want you to look and feel like their favorite apps, learn how to design customer experiences in a mobile first and mobile only world.

The Future of Retail/Shopping: Brian re-imagines the world of shopping, payments and retail/e-tail.

3) Silicon Valley and Innovation

Silicon Valley and Future Technology: What is it about Silicon Valley that drives innovation and disruption, what°Øs the hot new tech and what°Øs the next big thing?!

The Rise of Corporate Innovation Centers: in Silicon Valley and around the world, businesses are opening up innovation centers. What can these efforts teach you about the future of business? Find out.

Culture Shift: Technology is impacting business and society. See the world through the eyes of your customers and employees to feel a little empathy to drive human-centered innovation and compete for relevance.

Act Like a Startup: Disruption can come from anywhere and it takes a new approach to compete against threats large and small. Here°Øs how to think and act like startups to innovate differently.

4) Culture 2.0

The Engagement Gap: Employee engagement and morale are at record lows. Get introduced to the engagement gap and take steps to boost happiness and productivity by engaging Millennials and all employees with a new philosophy and infrastructure for work.

Leadership vs. Management: Shifting from a rut of management to that of leadership. See examples of how executives learn how to lead in roles from the top to bottom to inspire a more passionate, loyal and profitable workforce.

Culture of Innovation: Learn about the 12 pillars of innovation and how companies are investing in new cultures to nurture innovation internally.

Humans Need Not Apply: Digital literacy is everything now. Executives don°Øt live life as their customers do. Workforces and intellectual capital are aging. New expertise is in demand. Learn how to identify and train/hire for the jobs of the future.

5) Digital/Omni/Mobile/Social Marketing

R.R.S.: The future of marketing is tied to a thoughtful approach of R.R.S. (Relevance. Resonance. Significance.). Develop marketing strategies and campaigns that matter in a real-time, always-on, mobile-first world.

Responsive Storytelling and Engagement: Social, mobile, real-time changed the game for marketing, advertising and content strategies. Learn how to think of marketing as °∞social objects°± that talk to and through people, shifting from a world of impressions to expressions.

R.T. of Engagement: Marketing breaks down to actions, reactions and transaction. Design engaging marketing programs that handhold people through the funnel and the new customer journey.

Digital Influence and The New Influencer: From Twitter to Instagram to Youtube and everything in between, meet the new influencers and how to engage them.

6) Hey, Mr. Futurist, What°Øs The Future of°≠

®C Business
®C Retail and e-Commerce
®C Marketing
®C Music
®C Consumerism
®C Learning
®C Finance
®C Insurance
®C Silicon Valley/Innovation
®C Society

Please contact me if you°Ød like me to join your event.